Please answer the below Data Structure Questions:

why do we need data structure?

A.Data structure is a particular way of organizing and storing data in a computer so that it be accessed and modified
efficiently. Data structure is a collection of data values the relationships among them and the functions and operations
that can be applied to the data.

What are the various operations that can be performed on different Data Structures?
A.We can perform various operations on data structure such as sorting ,finding minimum/maximum,adding new element,
deleting an element or substituting any element . Organise data so that it can be accessed quickly and usefully.

List out the areas in which data structures are applied extensively?
A:1.Compiler Design 2.Operating System 3. Database Management System 4.Statistical Analysis package 5.Numerical Analysis
6.Graphics 7.Artificial Intelligence 8.Simulation

what is an Array?
A:An array, in the context of Java, is a dynamically-created object that serves as a container to hold constant number
of values of the same type

what is the difference between the Array and ArrayList?
A:Difference between array and arraylist in java include eight points namely Resizable, Performance, Traversal ,
Primitives , Length , Type-Safety, Adding elements , Multi-dimensional.
1- First and Major difference between Array and ArrayList in Java is that Array is a fixed length data structure
while ArrayList is a variable length Collection class.
You can not change length of Array once created in Java but ArrayList re-size itself when gets full depending upon
capacity and load factor. Since ArrayList is internally backed by Array in Java, any resize operation in ArrayList
will slow down performance as it involves creating new Array and copying content from old array to new array.
2- You can not use Generics along with Array, as Array instance knows about what kind of type it can hold and throws
ArrayStoreException, if you try to store type which is not convertible into type of Array. ArrayList allows you to
use Generics to ensure type-safety.
3- All kinds of Array provides length variable which denotes length of Array while ArrayList provides size() method
to calculate size of ArrayList in Java.
4- You can not store primitives in ArrayList, it can only contain Objects. While Array can contain both primitives
and Objects in Java.


what is LinkedList?
A:A linked list is a linear data structure where each element is a separate object. Each elements are not stored at
contiguous memory locations. A linked list consists of nodes where each node contains a data field and a reference(link)
to the next node in the list. So a linked list is comprising of two items - the data and a reference to the next node.
The last node has a reference to null. The entry point into a linked list is called the head of the list.

How is an Array different from Linked List?
A:The size of the array is fixed.
  Inserting a new element in an array of elements is expensive, because room has to be created for the new elements and
  to create room existing elements have to shifted.
  Random access is possible.
  Stored in contiguous Memory Locations.
  Memory Should be allocated at Compile-Time.


  Linked List:
  Dynamic size
  Ease of insertion/deletion
  Random access is not allowed.
  Extra memory space for a pointer is required with each element of the list.
  Arrays have better cache locality that can make a pretty big difference in performance.
  In Linked list memory is allocated at Run-Time.



what is queue?
A:Java Queue is an interface available in java.util package and extends java.util.Collection interface. Just like Java
List, Java Queue is a collection of ordered elements (Or objects) but it performs insert and remove operations
differently. We can use Queue to store elements before processing those elements.

what is stack?
A:Java Stack memory is used for execution of a thread. They contain method specific values that are short-lived
and references to other objects in the heap that are getting referred from the method. Stack memory is always
referenced in LIFO (Last-In-First-Out) order.

what is FIFO and LIFO?
A:FIFO is an acronym for first in, first out, a method for organizing and manipulating a data buffer, where the oldest
(first) entry, or 'head' of the queue, is processed first.FIFO's opposite is LIFO, last-in-first-out, where the
youngest entry or 'top of the stack' is processed first.

what is the order of complexity?
A:Generally, an algorithm has an asymptotic computational complexity. Assuming the input is of size N, we can say that
the algorithm will finish at O(N), O(N^2), O(N^3), O(N*log(N)) etc. This means that it is a certain mathematical
expression of the size of the input, and the algorithm finishes between two factors of it.Generally, the smaller the
order of complexity of the program's underlying algorithm, the faster it will run and the better it will scale as the
input gets larger. Thus, we should often seek more efficient algorithms in order to
reduce the order of complexity.

what is the best case to search an element from an array?
A:If the array is sorted, you can use Binary Search. If it is not, you have to use sequential search.

what is the worst case to search an element from an array?
A:For an unsorted array, you have to search element by element, until the element is found or array is completely traversed.
Element can be at 1st position, the last position or somewhere in between.The worst case arises when the element is at
last position or not in the array, therefore we have to traverse the whole array giving n no. of repetitions over loop.
Therefore the worst case time complexity is O(n).


what is tree in data structure?
A:A tree is a nonlinear data structure, compared to arrays, linked lists, stacks and queues which are linear data
structures. A tree can be empty with no nodes or a tree is a structure consisting of one node called the root and zero
or one or more subtrees.

what is graph in data structure?
A:A Graph is a non-linear data structure consisting of nodes and edges. The nodes are sometimes also referred to as
vertices and the edges are lines or arcs that connect any two nodes in the graph.

what is the difference between the HashTable and HashMap?
A:a-The HashMap class is roughly equivalent to Hashtable, except that it is non synchronized and permits nulls.
(HashMap allows null values as key and value whereas Hashtable doesn't allow nulls).
  b-HashMap does not guarantee that the order of the map will remain constant over time.
  c-HashMap is non synchronized whereas Hashtable is synchronized.
  d-Iterator in the HashMap is fail-safe while the enumerator for the Hashtable is not and throw
  ConcurrentModificationException if any other Thread modifies the map structurally by adding or removing any element
  except Iterator's own remove() method. But this is not a guaranteed behavior and will be done by JVM on best effort.


What are the major data structures used in the following areas : RDBMS, Network data model and Hierarchical data model.
A:he major data structures used are as follows:

  · RDBMS – Array (i.e. Array of structures)

  · Network data model – Graph

  · Hierarchical data model – Trees

How HashMap works in java?
A:HashMap in Java works on hashing principle. It is a data structure which allows us to store object and retrieve it in
constant time O(1) provided we know the key.

What is ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException in java? When it occurs?
A:An object of this class is thrown when code accesses an array with an illegal index. This happens when an index is
negative or greater than or equal to the length of the array being indexed.

What are the different ways of copying an array into another array?
A:There are multiple ways to copy elements from one array in Java e.g. you can manually copy elements by using a loop,
create a clone of the array, use Arrays.copyOf() method or System.arrayCopy() to start copying elements from one array to another in Java.


What is DFS and BFS?
A:The breadth first search (BFS) and the depth first search (DFS) are the two algorithms used for traversing and
searching a node in a graph. They can also be used to find out whether a node is reachable from a given node or not.

What is Recursion?
A:Recursion is a basic programming technique you can use in Java, in which a method calls itself to solve some problem.
A method that uses this technique is recursive. Many programming problems can be solved only by recursion, and some
problems that can be solved by other techniques are better solved by recursion.

What are linear and non linear data Structures?
A:n the linear data structure, the data is organized in a linear order in which elements are linked one after the other
Conversely, non-linear data structure involves multiple levels. Examples of the linear data structure are array, queue,
stack, linked list, etc.

What is Big-(O)-notation?
A:A beginner's guide to Big O notation. Big O notation is used in Computer Science to describe the performance or
complexity of an algorithm. Big O specifically describes the worst-case scenario, and can be used to describe the
execution time required or the space used (e.g. in memory or on disk) by an algorithm.
Outlined different kind of sorting algorithm with time complexity?

Draw a table with time complexity in which it will summarize all the data structure feature's advantages and disadvantages.
  a)In terms of Accessing element.
  b)In terms of Inserting element.
  c)In terms of Searching element.
  d)In terms of Removing element.


